Thank you very much for coming for this afternoon's discussion. I don't call it a book discussion
because you are welcome to ask questions about anything pertaining to the Dharma that you
are interested in. If you've been reading the book and you have questions, of course
you'll have the best answers, humanly possible. Kempo, would you be kind enough to lead us
in the seven-line prayer, once in Tibetan, once in English, and then may we have a silent
meditation for about one minute.
I would like to thank you very much for your support. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
How begin? Good morning, Rinpoche.
This time we talk about three kyas, and this time our prayer book also has five kyas, five
wisdoms. Can you please explain the five kyas, the Dharma kyas and the Bokeh kyas. Then with
another two. Two, two is hiding behind the three kyas. They're there, according to the
teaching. They're there, but they're just hiding. Hiding behind the Dharma kyas or the
Sambhu kyas. Those three, five kyas, generally three kyas is very popular, but then these
three extra kyas, that which is more explanation of the third kyas or Dharma kyas. Now again,
this Sanskrit language, Dharma kyas, I say this, Nirma kyas, Sambhu kyas, Dharma kyas,
Sobhava kyas, then indestructible kyas. Those are known as five kyas. These three are more
division or aspect of the Dharma kyas. And these kyas, generally what it means, kyas
is Sanskrit word, which means, is hip. H-E-A-P, I believe, is hip. Hip, that put so many things.
So what that means in the teaching said, because it means so many good call it, so many
accumulation
merit is resolved, so many accumulation merit is a bhut hoge de as those kyas, so therefore
it's called kyas. And then, so the last two kyas is Dharma kyas, but within the Dharma
kyas is Sobhava kyas, that means what is called. If it's Dharma kyas, if it's true kyas, Dharma
kyas, if you say what means Dharma kyas. The clarity aspect of the true nature is named
as Dharma kyas. And Sobhava kyas is emptiness aspect of the nature of the mind is called
Sobhava kyas. And what is Indestructible kyas? And that is union of the emptiness and clarity.
That is known as the Indestructible kyas. So that makes it five kyas, five kyas. And
then this is generally every, we all have that potential. It's nothing that we don't have.
We have that right now, each of us according to teaching. But however, our this nature
of the five kyas is very much hiding behind our habit patterns. That habit pattern is
also created by us. It's nobody else really overloaded, but it is hiding. But when we
begin to process to clear away the habit pattern, then those kyas and the kyas begin to shine
according to our capabilities. So now this, when we're talking five kyas is fully developed,
fully bright, glorified kyas, such as the kyas of the Buddha Shakyamuni, Gaurabhema Sambhava,
and Vedya Sattva. Those are then have all that five kyas. They're total enlightenment
fully. But we have that nature. We have that qualities. And then, I think you mentioned
five versitums. I'm sure many of you already know the five versitums. Again, it is five
versitums are the nature of our, again, mind. Mind is intelligence. It's versitums. But
how these versitums are operating is a, a versitum means is an outer operating and an inward
operating
call it. So therefore, then these five versitums are known as, again, I'm sure many of you
know that. Few of you don't know, but maybe don't know, but these five versitums, first
is, I mean, if we count these first dharmadattu versitums, then go to the merrow-like versitums,
then to the equanimity versitums, then to the discrimination, awareness versitums. I think
that's what translate it. And then is all accomplishing versitums. So those are known
as five versitums. And dharmadattu versitums is the emptiness aspect of the versitums.
Nature of all those versitums are also empty, empty. So dharmadattu versitums, that is really
basic nature. From that nature, emptiness, then these four versitums are reflecting a coordinate
needed. And merrow-like versitums means what? Every kind of symbol is just a metaphor. But
everything,
for example, this, again, we have two, we all have these five versitums. Well, our five
versitums are not fully shiny, developed. Again, this is our habit, depending on the
obscurations. But merrow-like versitums means, because when we see things, when you look to the
objects, when you say, I saw that, I heard that, I smelled that, but we heard that, how you find?
It's like merrow images. It really reflects to you, merrow image. That is merrow-like versitums.
I mean, that's it. It's merrow. It's merrow. In the merrow, when we say, the poems appear in merrow
,
but where is that poems? In which part of the merrow is existing? You can't really see. I don't
know. I mean, maybe you know more better than me. And the scientists say, scientific lives,
loves, loves. Maybe you know better. But, I mean, there's nothing to explain. But really,
you see. So, this is the same thing. Mind is like that. We reflect all the senses, according
to that situation and circumstances. That's the merrow-like versitums. That's it. But we have,
but our is just a, again, is a dimmed, dim. And then, the econimite versitums. Econimite
versitums, when we see all the things, things, no matter whatever, there's a big or the small,
is this, all is the same. When it comes to the mind, it's the same. There's no dependent comp
artments,
no different places. It's just all is there. And then, nature is the same. Also, empty. It's the
same. So, that's called the econimite versitums. But when they're reflecting that, even though it's
econimite, even if they're reflecting it to this merrow image, you know we need to come to your
mind. Distinctively, everything is so clearly, precisely. Precisely. And that is then, what's
translated as discrimination, awareness, versitums. Or maybe we can translate it as clearly,
knowing,
distinctively, exactly as it is, versitum that. That is clear, versitums. And then, the next one is
,
pick the one, is the old, a complex versitums. Because of understanding knowledge,
things, what we are a complex in the world. Ourself, to the others, is by our mind, our versitum.
Otherwise, there's no movement, no achievement, no advances. Everything is really dependent
absolutely with the knowledge of our versitums. Whether that's big or that is small,
we're a complex. So, that is called, that aspect of the, is called a complex in versitums. So,
those are the five of us. Okay. Thank you so much. Thank you. Okay, yes. Oh, thank you. Jeff.
My question is somewhat less esoteric, but it's something that we don't ordinarily address, which
is the dangers of practice. Dangers of practice. Yeah. And page 45 of the root text, it mentions
that the great profundity of this Dharma carries obstacles with it in the same way that great
profit goes together with great risk. At the place where you practice, spirits will show. Anybody
has a book, book that, can I borrow it just for one minute? I think this is important. It's not
something we often, to which we often refer. 45, Marianne. Thank you. Page 45. Thank you.
It's in the root text. Okay. Okay, that's good. 45.
I think it's a brilliant passage. It's something that my concern is where in our practice
might we go where at the place where you practice, spirits will show their forms. I'm sorry. Again,
could you help? I don't really know the Romanian. No, I guess I asked you on fortune, right?
Forty-five. That's because it's a Romanian, right?
It's the last paragraph on page 45. It's an easy one. Oh, it is 45. 45. Okay.
And for anybody who hasn't read it, it's really a frightening paragraph.
It promises you'll acquire a bad reputation, close friends will turn into enemies, and so on.
Now, we all know that there is a danger to the practice, because if you go too far advanced
without the right instruction, there are the obstacles. Yeah, yeah. But what are some of the
early signs that maybe our practice is starting to stray off into this dangerous territory?
That's different. Yeah? Okay, so there's a definitely, I mean, we can all experience it.
And not can be, it will go, we all have these kind of experiences, one after another. Really
well-happened that. The first, the foundation of our practice is, generally talking, the foundation
,
the bolder, B-O-U-L-D-E, our bolder of our practice is courage, commitment,
and devotion, and bodhicata. Those are really the bolder of that. And also, same time, humble
and humility. Humility. Those are the bolder. And now, with those bolders, or with that anchor down
,
your salt and your practice are continuous. Then, there is, sometimes, we think, maybe, I mean,
begin to practice Dharma, and everything goes really well, and smooth, and all that things.
It's true, our goal, that is our goal. But on the path, definitely we can experience,
in that journey, we can experience many things, things, and up and down, and all that things.
Because according Buddhism, that is due to our karma. Practice is, we are cleansing the karma.
There is good karma, there is bad karma. And what we are doing, this practice, we are increasing
the
good karma, and purifying the unnecessary, unhealthy, or bad karma. So, therefore, powerful
practices,
practices will convert quickly, or roughly, begin to really cleanse in the bad karma.
And those bad karmas begin to reflect many different ways. Those are, then, I mean,
this is here, clearly mentioned, one after another, his own dungeon, which is dead. But we can't
summarize all the obstacles. Obstacles, and that is generally terminology in the Buddha's teaching,
is known as poor demons. Poor demons, and the force is known as demon of the emotions.
The demon of the emotion, this poor demon is, again, a metaphor. It is not something that really
exists, a figure, outside, not necessarily, but it is, because they are obstacles. Therefore,
it is a demon. It is a demon because we think that demon is bad, and it is a bad obstacle.
So, that is what they use, the metaphor. Personally, it is like demon of the emotions.
The demon of emotion is, many times, when we practice, this is what is arising here. Here,
for example, that appeared in these forms. Demon of emotions arises this, arises, and they also are
then what? Sometimes, some externally appeared, inwardly appeared. The part, mostly important,
as I said, the border of the practice is courage, and commitment, and devotions, and practices,
such as zuking practice. And zuking practice, what in the teachings, again in the Buddhism,
Buddha's teaching said, let it come, let it go. Be in the, be, be as it is.
Trying to avoid, trying to do things in this emotion, arise in the kind of comfort, like me,
against the back and forth, that is the creating the turbulence. You're supporting, you're helping,
we are supporting, we are helping, we are activating that. So, therefore, the best in
zuking teaching, let it come, let it go, let it be that way. Whatever it comes,
keep the courage, keep the confidence. And that is, is, so that means you are really,
if we have that capabilities, we are controlling our mind, we are keeping balance, we are anchored.
But every distracted that, that means our mind is now, are unstable. Distracted means we are
unstable. Then, that could become bigger and bigger. And that is, then become, that, that,
that means, then in kind of like, some other terminology about the teaching said, we couldn't
control our own perceptions. We are not really controlling. And zuking don't have to control,
as I said, let it come, let it be, relax on the present status. Not really bothering that.
But then, if that happen, then is all different things can happen. Externally, things can happen,
as in the teaching said here, teaching things, kind of maybe, even the images, the figures are
coming
that, images, the figures coming, those are the, also the kind of frightening things, images,
figures are calling and all different things. There's a variety of this. So, this, that is,
then emotion involved. Maybe something, do this of the anger and frightening. And or maybe
sometimes
more attachment, more patience, more desires come, more greed is arising that. And thinking that's
kind of good and all those things. These are all known as the, then, then is known as the,
it's called the emotion. Most of them, generally, all the obstacles are, are best on the emotions,
emotions. But that time, the most important is keep the practice, keep the, remember the
instructions.
Remember the instruction, keep that. And of course, some health issues come,
only troubles come. Then, then definitely do you have to solve the trouble or take the medicines
and all your best. But not too much completely. Emotions are swinging back and forth. Then we
lost and really grown, grown to that. And then good things also happen. This is among the four
demons,
four demons. The second, I mean, second or the next demon is called demon of the, demon, demon
of the pleasing, pleasing demon, pleasing. And that is, again, comes something so kind of nice
looking,
nice ways. And here, say, there may be the, there's some kind of, it appears that they're talking
something nice things and predictions. You're doing good, this and that things, all that. But
if those happened again, if you keep that, you'll continue your practice as it is, then there's no
obstacles at all. But we carried with that, that good kind of prediction, good science and good
omen and believe on that and to act with that way. Then it's called demon. We can, many, many in
the
history, in the teaching, in Buddhism, Buddhism, those, even at once the practitioners are really
become obstacle because the, this demon of the pleasing is a very sneaky, sneaky. Looks, it is
so beautiful like that, but that is honey put on the razor blades. Honey put in the razor blades
and then it will, oh, poison covered by the chocolate. It could be big poison, it could be
small poison, but it is a poison. That's called pleasing demons. And that also can come, kind of,
as many people are going to talk, oh, how nice you are, how beautiful you are, how you are great,
this and that. And you're also achieving lateral kind of good things. And then you feel also
something kind of, oh, maybe I'm really good, must be good, kind of more elevated our ego and then
ignore the common ground, this basic thing. That is a demon. That's it. So therefore,
always should anchor down our practices be in this. We keep the instructions. Then you're winning,
you're controlling and you're subduing demons of the pleasing. And then, oh, really completely
activating more and more good ways. And the next one, the next three are then is just three demons
are known as the demon of the aggregates. Also our physical things are, we just have to keep more
balance. Not too much, not too little. And we're trying to do too many things with our body. And
then we just endless. So therefore, what in the Buddha's teaching opens it, the body is a vehicle,
body is like boat. Boat, keep nice and don't ignore, but yet you don't have too many decorated boat
.
Pleasing completely, yachting, all those, whatever the modern common is, trying to get everything.
Then I think it goes on and on. It's just too much distractions. But also not completely ignore
that
because this is really neat. I mean, this body is so special, beautiful. So everyone in the Buddha
's
teaching opens it, said balance. Balance, middle way. That is really what teaching says. So then
you're controlling or you're subduing the demon of aggregates. And then the next one is the demon
of the deaths. That is then, that we all have to go through that. No one is exception. But if you
're
good practicing, if you're practicing, then the death is just another change. It's nothing
particular. There is always a day, there is always night. It goes on and on. In reality, nature is
same as great emptiness state. So then those are known as demon, but demon of the controlling or
the subduing, the demon of the dead. So this is what really explaining this. But mostly important,
practitioners, when you kind of get some nice realization, good things or something,
or some kind of obstacle comes and then they kind of disappointed. They lost their courage and
commitment and confidence and then kind of almost started blaming to the teaching, blaming to the,
to one's own self at the end. Those are then really is obstacle. That is a demon. So therefore,
he said, watch out all that. So that is my brief explanation of the obstacles. Thank you very much.
Thank you for taking my question. I just have two very general ones. One is the Buddhist practice
of mindfulness. Like how do we in our everyday lives become more mindful people? The second
question is how, this is perhaps a longer one. How would you maybe describe the Buddhist concept of
love and people who are being introduced to Buddhism? Some things I understand. Suppose I
understand this. The mindfulness is generally, mindfulness is wisdom, is intelligence. And also
mindfulness means that you look occasionally you're taking to yourself, taking in your mind
by yourself. That is really the mindfulness. So that can be, for example, where is my mind
and kind of take, take the kind of normal, nice breathing and look to your mind. Even one second,
or two seconds, if you do that, according to teaching it really will help to kind of calm down
whole systems. Not just only mind is coming, but when mind is coming, the whole systems of our
bodies, movement, energy, everything is beginning to calm down. But at the time when we're not
mindfulness, that means we're looking always outside. We're distracted by the old object with
six senses. One of those, just carry it. And then maybe many times, together, just so busy. And our
energy, our everything is just so in a way almost like turbulence status. But when you do this,
look to your mind and with normal breathing, just for a few seconds, it really creates the whole
systems, calm and peaceful. And that is the beginning of the mindfulness. Then all different
thoughts, kind of respect and appreciating, kind of appreciating for a few seconds. That is
mindfulness. Appreciating. And appreciating of myself or one's own self. Appreciating to the others
,
kind of be happy of all good things you have. That is mindfulness. Also feel compassion
to yourself, to the others. What is happening in the world, just even for a few seconds.
So those are all really mindfulness because these are all our inner treasures. Love is our inner
treasure. Compassion is our inner treasure. And during application is our inner treasures.
And all the inner treasures, whatever, whenever we reflect to that, we are settling ourselves.
When we are in the emotional status, we are out. Really we are out. Our mind is not with us. We are
not with the treasures. We are carried by the turbulence of the unhealthy habit appearance
of the mind. It is carried. And then you create a rest. That's all that. So the mindfulness,
then with that, like with those thoughts, and if you are sitting for a few minutes or one,
five minutes, ten minutes, just calm, peaceful, that's all. Mindfulness, meditation, because you
are really touching to the deep nature of the on our beauty, call it this. You begin to see things
very beautifully, nice and calm, peaceful. Or even there's trouble and difficult things happening
that at least you got something calm and really performative. So that is kind of in a way the
mindfulness, the probability, so mindful that. And then love, as I already mentioned, is the true
nature of the mind. It's part of our treasures. But Buddhism, love is generally, love is for all
every living beings that we can do. Just really that. And that is just, we don't, exactly we don't
know how to do that. But we pray, such as the great master in the lineage teaching Americans,
may all living beings have the happiness and cause of happiness. Thinking of those world and the
relaxing of our mind, then reaching that true kind of like spreading that light of that energy to
all
living beings. That is really loving kind, love of the Buddhism. Generally, love is important,
special, beautiful, really that. But the love with emotion, that is, as I already mentioned, is not
maybe exactly, but it is like honey with a razor. Maybe not exactly, but you can be lined up in
that
direction. So with emotion, then you just become, you could get like trouble too.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. When we look at the nature of our mind, and we might be able to recognize that there's
nothing there, but yet we talked about our mind. So, do you understand?
Yeah, yeah. I hope so. I hope so. But we're talking about there's nothing. That's how we are smart.
But this, I think, this, when there's mind, this, when there's nothing, that is the absolute level
of the mind. So, I mean, everything, everything in the samsara, nirvana, all that according to
our gracious teacher, the Buddha here is summarized into truths. That's called relative truths and
absolute truths. So, the mind is also within these two truths. So, that's what it's called.
How we discover the absolute truths. When you look, when you investigate, when you're analyzing,
you find the absolute truths. That is really the absolute truth. When you don't analyze,
don't ever analyze and investigate, then we are in a relative world. That is just kind of a
roughly idea, roughly idea. So, when we don't analyze and don't investigate, then mind is here.
I mean, that's what we're doing. All this is here, and not just mind is here. We divided mind
also in Buddhism six, add consciousness. Not just one mind, add consciousness. And then we divided,
I mean, the teaching said, conception divided 51 or 52 conceptions. All those dividing, division.
And then, so, but that is all relative truths. So, relative truth is, yes, is existing, and that's
what we're doing. That's what happiness is here, sadness is here, and all the trouble is here,
frightening is here, and excitement is here. Everything is nothing really ignored, nothing really
decline or say no. It's all here. Talking about absolute level, but then we look at each of those.
As we're talking, we're trying to find where is that. What is that? Then the answer is the same.
There's nothing that we can find by these conceptions. By these conceptions. That is
also nothing find is that something is talking or nothing to find, but that is a conception too.
That is also a conception. For that reason, to kind of apply that to bring that to kind of clearly
as
much as you can call it of the absolute truth, what most of the time said, beyond the conception.
Beyond the conceptions. So, those are what really sit there. So, that, but absolutely level,
if we discover the absolute level as it is, then related truth they all talk at them.
Talk at them, they're not really different. And then, when we just kind of have the more meaning
of this, for example, when meditating or the joking, joking or absolute truth, then this
relative truth become also magical display. Magical display, and it's not something that
kind of way. We hold this relative truth so strongly, solid, and concrete, and that's making
all this kind of uncomfortable. So then, when you realize that, then you won't do that.
That is just all displays. It's the same nature. So, even though you go through the different
things,
but you know, in the inner level, those individualism is just seeing that as a display.
Okay, here's the thing.
Good morning, mademoiselle. When you speak of beyond conceptualization, and primordial wisdom,
and absolute truth, and how all of it is just absolutely perfect,
and that was the pre-existence of everything from beginningless time, how did this happen?
I mean, everything was perfect, and then all of a sudden, here we are suffering and making
mistakes left and right. Why did this happen? That, according to that, is happening because
we mishandled our display. And that is the, you, I'm sure when we joined that prayer of
Kunduzampu, that tells really very clearly, tell that. And what in the teaching said that basically
ground you and I, Kunduzampu, share the same, same, there's that. But how that happened? Then, for
us,
that split it. In the samsara, nirvana, we were created two junctions. And that is the beginning,
that is, when the display of the primordial arises, we grasping, we hold, we hold. And you didn't,
we didn't recognize is our own displays, we created subject object. Same time, according to
teaching,
that moment in a way, certain, I mean, the Kunduzampu prayer said, there is certain kind of fears,
fears, f-e-a-r, fears. When you have the fear, then next is hope. Hope is they go by side by side.
Then you're strengthening or we're strengthening the dualities. We're tied up or the building of
the dualities. Then that expanded, that's expanded, and then ego claim came. Ego claim. Ego is also
not substantial, solid exist. Is it? Is it? Mind. But we create ego. Any ego created that
immediately,
then we created the active emotions, the six emotions, or five emotions. Then whole, the show
begins.
Then our show is, our movie is already here. Project it, begin, and then see the movie of the
six realms. All going on and on. On and on. Until we dissolve the projection.
Hi, Rinpoche. My name is Angel and I'm new, very new. And in listening right now, kind of from a
little bit of an outsider's perspective, trying to get in, I'm questioning whether or not there's
a conflict between any person, especially a person like myself, wanting to strive for
excellence or to be better, to improve my whole job and work-life situation. If there's a conflict
between that and the practices of the Dharma, is there something with my ego that maybe it's not
the right path to take? I'm looking for, I'm seeking the wrong path. And that, Angel, this is, of
course,
it depends up to you, how you feel that. It's all started with you. Really, how you feel this path
is what we're talking, looks like kind of appealing, nice, comfortable. Comfortable is helpful,
and that is then, that's what is good. But somehow, it's not exactly good or it is a conflicting,
it is not that. That is then, is not suiting with your mind, so is not suitable. So, that is
generally, you just say, you have the first, like, to handle that situation. But Dharma, what we're
discussing is nothing alien, nothing strange, nothing foreign. We're talking about our mind.
Whether you believe or not believe, or whether whatever it is religions you have, we all have
the mind. Everyone, whatever religions you are, or spiritual, you follow, or whether you don't
have the spiritual, but everyone wants happy, and joy, and peace, and comfortable, and fulfillment.
That is true, the hundred percent everyone, very true. So, this, what we're talking, discussing,
it's definitely is a special tool and a method to achieving peace, calm, and joy, and appreciation.
Also, let more understand, not narrow the corner of our knowledge. We are kind of opening our broad
view, broad way understanding. Understand this, definitely. So, therefore, generally, I don't say
really, but conflict to any beliefs. What we're discussing is love and compassion. It's actually
deepening. If you have the spiritual belief, it will deepen it. It will know more exactly,
because the Buddha's teaching, it's not just a vague teaching. It's so thorough, so precise,
and so down to the earth, down to the earth, so precise. He touched the core of whatever that is,
really, that is. So, it's not just a kind of a leap. There's some kind of an outside choice there,
but
whether you are solving, solving your own situation, whether you're making your understandable,
understandable, and then moving forward, or they deepen our self.
Thank you so much. Great. Thank you.
Rinpoche, thank you so much. I'm thinking about the golden age. They talk about the time of Ashok,
King Ashok, in the golden age. So, what did they mean by a golden age? I mean, you know,
is that like on a relative level that everything was, you know, going well, or is that a dharmic
thing? How did it happen, and why did it end? According to the teaching, golden age is really
the beginning of the kind of generations. This now is called the degeneration times,
but golden age is the beginning of that era or generation. According to the teaching, golden age
time, everything is so easy. Everything is so calm and peaceful. And according to the teaching,
at the very early beginnings, there's, I mean, it's a little different than the
evolution of what the scientist says. It's a little different. At the beginning time of this,
this, the universe begins, at that time, that every human being has their own glowing light.
And they're all, also there is no need to harvest it. There is unharvested crops are growing,
growing that. And there is no kind of fighting and curling going on. And the emotion is so low,
low and calm and peaceful. So, that, those are really known as beginning of the golden age.
Then it began to kind of like, emotions have become, why that begins decreasing that because
of the emotions. Then emotions are getting stronger and stronger. And then all the situations,
what you have the old, you know, that is beginning to kind of fading away, slowly, slowly. And then
they start to kind of like, begin to, to do the what called the like, territorials become
territorials. And then they start to kind of become more subject and I and you and this and that,
that.
And then, then began to that time. Then according to teaching, they started, because they start
beginning to curling, curling of fighting or something effect, not really big things. But they,
then they appointed the kings. And those are not at the beginning time, according to Buddha
teaching,
kings are, king, leaders are appointed by the people and they cease, kind of selected. So,
it's called manpukurva yapu, means the honored one by everyone. So, it's like democratic, of course
,
that time. Then that emotion becomes stronger and stronger and those who are elected that,
those by the democratic ways, they like to stay in the power themselves, not elation. Then you
call the kings. Then kings that they are ruling this and that thing. So, then emotion become bigger
,
bigger and bigger. And then the golden age is transformed to the, I think, so the need, then
second, second, second generation. That means that whatever the golden age has, it become hub,
hub. So, second. Then it kind of continue growing, growing and then become something in it a bit,
they say something, means then three quarters left, left. That lasts longer, then continue growing.
And then that change it to the, to the, to the, that degeneration. So, now it's the generation
things. So, that is like, yeah, that's what, how, let's just explain. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you.
Yes.
I can't, a couple weeks ago you told me that the ornament of the wrathful deities was fire.
And I was trying to understand that. Now, one of the things that's influenced my practice
as much or more than anything since I've been coming here, is something from Shantideva. What?
Something from Shantideva. Oh, yeah, yeah, right. He said that we need to guard our minds
the way we would guard a wounded or broken arm while walking through an unruly crowd. Yeah.
So, that's, that's quite a, quite a challenge to do that. Because it's asking, it's really asking
me,
it's asking us to sort of be, be so attentive to the mind even before the words come.
And connecting that with fire, that, you know, once I heard Krishnamurti give a talk called
the fire of attention. That at a certain intensity and passionate quality, attention becomes like a
fire. And it seems like I need to almost have that in order to, you know, watch the mind before the
words come. So my question really is, this is like, what then is the garment of the wrathful deity?
You said that's the ornament fire of the wrathful deity. What's the garment? Garment? Garment,
clothing.
Garment. Garment. Yes. Garment of the white umbrella. White umbrella is old variety of the
divine clothes. So silk, silk and different colors. I mean, silk. And then also the necklace and
the
bracelets are all basically peaceful. But this is the wrathful deity. That would be the peaceful
deity.
This what's called the white umbrella is semi-wrathful. Semi-wrathful. Semi-wrathful. Okay.
So therefore she has all those peaceful, you know, appealing, appealing ornaments. But at the same
time, then she has as, of course, it depends with many different emanations. But many times, then
she
has many eyes, many arms and holding many different what's called weapon, weapon areas or the
ancient
those things. And those are all, and then she has also kind of semi-round eyes. Eyes are like not
completely round, but not completely kind of peaceful way. Those are all known as semi-wrathful,
wrathful aspect of that. So she is, she is that, I mean, the wrathful, semi-wrathful. So those are
known as the, but what I say those, one point you in the, you asked and I mentioned the bone
ornament
something, maybe I said that, and that is, is very wrathful. And that is also wrathful ornament.
That is more connected to the inner tantrums. This white umbrella is more connected
and outer tantrums, outer tantrums. So therefore, it is slightly different than that.
Thank you.
That's it. And then, of course, what do you say these great master Shandai, Shanti Deva said,
"God your mind as you want, God your own want." And that is really excellent. I mean, all the
teaching, that's what really the mindfulness. Mindfulness, that means not just a once in a
while brain, the mindfulness, but it should have the mindfulness always with you. And that is
really
what that will make the big difference. And in the same line in those teachings, Shanti Deva says,
there's nothing better practice than guarding your own mind. Mind. There's nothing more
better practices or ascetic practices than guarding your own mind. And if you don't guard
your mind, what, what other practice it will do to you. Therefore, I will put, with folded hands,
I will request to you all, guide your mind. That's what Shanti Deva said. Really, I mean,
all those wonderful, if you read that first chapter or the second chapter of the Shanti Deva,
I mean, it's just absolutely like perfect, great teachings on the mindfulness that as
admire and follow all those great masters in Tibet. Really, that all schools, whatever,
believe them, not just some that. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And then I just told maybe,
we doing the breathing pre-efficacy exercise, right? Yes. I think many of you know already,
right? Yes. No, but few of you don't, you know that what means breathing pre-efficacy exercise?
No. Sometimes. No, that's it. Yeah. Of course, maybe you don't. But breathing pre-efficacy
exercise is generally, is, I mean, very important in Vajrayana Buddhism, because the body is,
is completely like kind of occupied or body has three principles. Channel, wind and essence
elements. These three, wind is what? Breathing, wind is the breathing. Breathing is wind.
And wind has many different wind, variety of wind, big and small. Breathing is gross, gross wind,
or gross air. And what, we were talking about the thought about the mindfulness, the emotion,
all these things. Who really accelerating that? It's wind. The breathing, that is accelerating
all the emotions. So therefore, before you do the meditative, this is the idea of you do the
breathing pre-efficacy exercise. That means you're preifying the negative energies in the body
that is hovering in our systems. Or in other words, maybe the inner pollutions
that you're really releasing that. Inner pollutions are created by what?
Emotions. Emotions. All the energies kind of, it's just really hovering. This is,
then the emotions, they all kind of summarize all the emotions. And the Buddha said it's three
portions. Ignorance, attachment, anger. That toxic, toxic air, toxic blue, that which is hovering
in
our brain, in our systems of body, now you're cleaning that. And so then our kind of system,
the environment of the inner space become more clean, more kind of pristine. So that really will
help to our meditation, our practice, to the inner touch, to call it. So that's ideas. That's the
meaning of that breathing pre-efficacy exercise. When you purify, and now this is according to
the teaching, again, it just of course roughly, where it grows level, but it's the right part of
the body. Again, with this different kind of man or woman or that, but this time just to say,
the right part of the body is more, has led more tenderness to have the, like the kind of
anger, emotion, or related anger, anger, toxic air. And left head, little more kind of like
pollutions of the attachment related air. And then generate all over is, is the inner
related with that. And it just is the principle, but otherwise all has all three. It has, anger has
attachment, ignorance, ignorance, attachment has anger and ignorance, and, and the ignorance has
also those three, both up to attachment and anger too. But this, so when we do this, what do we do?
Do this with holding this, and this kind of hold the breathing, and the kind of pull eye and the
body in, and put your, these thumbs, thumbs to the edge of the right fingers. According to Buddhism
,
right finger is very special, again, channel here, nerve systems. There's emotion, right? Emotion
is,
and, and as well as energy of the emotions, energy of the wisdom kind of flowing here, there. So
when
you hold the breath down, that in the way, in the conception, or in the mind, you're pressing,
stopping, or blocking, that emotion is. So now gather everywhere, and then you pull in, hold,
and do those movements, really, and then throw this, and put down, and that time when you exhale,
mostly the anger related to toxic air, emotions, so that pollutions are went from the, from the
right nostrils, nostrils. And that color is a dark kind of color, smoking kind of dark colors,
that they call it. So it's mainly anger, but it has attachment, it has ignorance. And the second
time is the attachment. That is, again, a dark red color. Mainly is the attachment, and with anger,
and all that pollutions went out. And the third is, is then ignorance. That comes from both nost
rils
and mouth, as we do, and came in color. It's kind of dark, smoking colors, colors, and then release
that. And then you repeat that again and again, and of course, gross level, subtle level, very
refined level, polluted, polluted, all went out completely clear with that. So that is a brilliant
meaning of the, what's called this brilliant purificic exercise. So that, and then after that,
when you realize that, then you're going to now meditate with mindfulness, bring all kind of good
things, joy and appreciation, really. And just joy and appreciation and compassion and thought for
all
living beings, just relax for a few seconds of one minute of that, and then feel also presence of
the
Buddha as the enlightened beings. They meditate with us, feel presence. "Buddha, vada, bharma, samb
hava,
tara," you know, all the linear masters come right in front of us. They are meditating, they are
supporting us, and we are kind of in a way close with that. So they are also sending us a lot of
blessings and light, and then just meditate according to your instruction or whatever you're
following. So that's just, again, a reminder of our meditation. And that's it. Thank you,
thank everyone. Okay, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you. I will do it in a short.
I'm so full of gratitude. You asked such beautiful questions, and instead of getting
a fabulous answer, we received about 10 different teachings. Thank you, Kempo.
Thank you all for being here. We'll now just do the one paragraph of the dedication of merit on
page 11, and then one more minute of meditation. Okay, thank you. Thank you again for all of us.
[Music]
Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you, thank you, thank you very much, everyone. Thank you again
,
thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you.